Create BOSC_review_process.md (#11)
OBF/bosc_materials: BOSC_review_process.md

# BOSC Review Process

(Version 1.0, 2020-Feb-06)

> BOSC is run by volunteers--we couldn't do it without your help! We greatly appreciate your taking time from your busy life to volunteer as a BOSC reviewer! Please review these guidelines before signing up as a reviewer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
BOSC is run by volunteers--we couldn't do it without your help! We greatly appreciate your taking time from your busy life to volunteer as a BOSC reviewer! To understand the process and so you can more effectively conduct your work, please review these guidelines before signing up as a reviewer.
```

## BOSC 2020

In July 2020, BOSC will be part of the Bioinformatics Community Conference ([BCC2020](https://bcc2020.github.io/)).
BCC2020 will include BOSC and GCC, each of which has its own review committee. This document applies only to BOSC.

## Reviewer requirements

BOSC reviewers participate in this process by invitation only. Reviewers are invited by the BOSC Organizing Committee. If you’d like to volunteer as a reviewer, please contact us at [bosc@open-bio.org](mailto:bosc@open-bio.org).

> All members of the BOSC review committee members must read and agree to follow the Conference’s Code of Conduct ([https://bcc2020.github.io/cod/](https://bcc2020.github.io/cod/)), as well as the review process outlined here. This is to ensure that the review process is fair and reliable, that all review requirements are applied consistently, and that reviewers understand abstract acceptance criteria and thus can constructively critique the submissions.

Reviewer 2: It is nice to have a URL, but we'll have to remember to update this every year.

### Late-breaking abstracts

An additional late-breaking abstract submission round is normally run shortly (1-2 months) prior to the conference. Abstracts accepted in the late round are normally limited to a lightning talk and/or poster presentation; they are not eligible for long talks. Submissions to this round can be new submissions or abstracts that were rejected in the first round and have been improved based on reviewers’ comments. These late-round abstracts undergo a similar process for review. 

### Acceptance criteria

To be accepted (even for poster presentation), abstracts submitted to BOSC **must be**:

1. **Relevant**: Your abstract must describe how your work relates to some aspect of open source software, open science or open data applied to biological or biomedical science.
2. **Available**: Your code / data / materials (e.g., documentation) must be available at the URL you list.

> 3. **Open Content**: Work discussed in BOSC presentations must be open source / open content, with a recognized license (which must be included in the repository) and a URL for accessing your code or other content. For abstracts about non-software products or projects (for example, educational materials), these should also be made freely available with an appropriate open license. See [https://www.open-bio.org/events/bosc/submit/](https://www.open-bio.org/events/bosc/submit/) for more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. **Open Content**: Work discussed in BOSC presentations must be open source / open content, with a recognized license (which must be included in the repository) and a URL for accessing your code or other content. For abstracts about non-software products or projects (for example, educational materials), these should also be made freely available with an appropriate open license. See [BOSC submission instructions](https://www.open-bio.org/events/bosc/submit/) for more information.
```

> 4. **For returning projects: progress since last report at BOSC**: If you presented this project at a previous BOSC in any form (talk, demo, and/or poster), your abstract must describe progress since the last BOSC presentation.

Reviewer 3: Not a blocker! But missed this in the edits.  Each item in the list is expected to start with 'must be' the way it's worded, which works except for item 4.  Not sure how to fix it, maybe 'Progressive since last report at BOSC (for returning projects)'.

Reviewer: I think it's entirely fine as is. The language is clear ("must") and is a well-readable English sentence.

Reviewer 3: @hlapp I'm being a bit *too* pedantic, it's my early grammar studies lizard brain kicking in. The way I read this is reliant on the intro sentence. For example, on each point:

1. ...abstracts submitted to BOSC **must be** **Relevant**
2. ...abstracts submitted to BOSC **must be** **Available**
3. ...abstracts submitted to BOSC **must be** **Open Content**
4. ...abstracts submitted to BOSC **must be** **For returning projects: progress since last report at BOSC**

The first three flow well, but that last one didn't click.  Hence my suggestion "...abstracts submitted to BOSC **must be** ** Progressive since last report at BOSC for returning projects**".

Reviewer: Yes, I noticed that later. _Progressive since_ may be correct English, but I haven't heard that phrase used anywhere else in this context. My suggestion would be not to have the _must be_ lead in at the front, but, for example, to say _must satisfy the following criteria_.

Author: Agree that "progressive since" reads a little odd. I'm not sure what you're suggesting, though, Hilmar--can you be more specific about the change you're recommending?

Reviewer 3: @nlharris this would be in the intro sentence just prior to the list.  From:

```
To be accepted (even for poster presentation), abstracts submitted to BOSC **must be**:
```

to

```
To be accepted (even for poster presentation), abstracts submitted to BOSC **must satisfy the following criteria**:
```

Reviewer: Yes, and then have **Be Relevant**, **Is Available**, etc, or some such. That's a little more than a trivial change, which is in part why I said it's kind of fine as it is.

Author: I appreciate Chris's desire for parallel construction of these four items. I would prefer that, too, but as Hilmar observed, it's not trivial to rework them to make them all parallel. Therefore, I am inclined to deem this "good enough".

Reviewer 3: Works for me, it will be easier to address once it's included.

5. **Correctly formatted**: Abstracts must be in PDF format, are limited to one page (8.5x11” or A4) and should include the title, author name(s), open source license, and code or project URL. Accepted abstracts are published on the BOSC website as-is.

> If a reviewer determines that an abstract does not meet one or more of the requirements, they will note that on the review form and are not required to supply detailed comments on other aspects of the abstract.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a reviewer determines that an abstract does not meet one or more of the requirements, they will note that on the review form. In this case, the reviewer is not required to supply detailed comments on other aspects of the abstract.
```

### Additional criteria

> In addition to the abstract requirements listed above, reviewers in the past have also considered the following criteria to evaluate abstracts for a talk. Note that these are _not_ requirements for abstract acceptance, but are additional criteria on which abstracts may be judged. Abstracts that don’t meet these “nice to have” criteria are still likely to be offered posters, as long as they meet the non-optional requirements described earlier.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to the abstract requirements listed above, reviewers in the past have also considered the following criteria to evaluate abstracts for a talk. Note that these are _not_ requirements for abstract acceptance, but are additional criteria on which abstracts may be judged. Abstracts that don’t meet these additional criteria are still likely to be offered posters, as long as they meet the requirements described earlier.
```

Reviewer: Note that there really is no such thing as an optional requirement, so "non-optional requirement" sounds weird to me.

Reviewer 3: Agreed, missed that one!

1. **Community impact**: Please describe how your work fits into the open source bioinformatics / open science ecosystem.  A summary of the current and/or projected community aspect of your project is very helpful.
2. **Novelty**: Innovative approaches are interesting to hear about, but it’s fine to build on existing technology; you don’t need to be novel to get a talk at BOSC. If you can compare your approach with existing approaches, that’s a plus.
3. **Examples**: We like abstracts that include an example of how your approach works (e.g. a figure showing the output of a visualization tool, an example of software input/output, or benchmarks on relevant data). 
4. **Usable**: Although we are happy to consider abstracts that describe early-phase projects, our reviewers are likely to look at your code and try to run it. Reviewers like projects that they are able to download and run, and that are well-documented and easy to use.

### Reviewer comments

> New this year, we are adding a checklist of abstract requirements to the review form. The first step for reviewers is to check whether these criteria are satisfied by the abstract. Abstracts that fail to meet one or more of these requirements will be rejected, but the authors will be encouraged to revise and resubmit their abstracts in the next round.

Reviewer: Perhaps this is fine, but note that with this wording (_New this year, we are adding ..._) you will need to change it next year. It's not the only thing that will need changing (there are dates etc), but speaking from experience it's in a place that begs to be overlooked for stuff that needs changing when the time comes.

Author: You're not wrong, Hilmar, but I do want to emphasize that this is a change. Most of our reviewers will be returning from last year.

Reviewer: Yes, I realize that too, and indeed this better get attention.

Reviewer 2: Maybe "New in 2020, we have a checklist ..." would be future proof wording?
